# Getting Started

---

## Installation

### Prerequsiite

- [Python](https://www.python.org/) version >= 3.9
- Basic [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax) knowledge
- Terminal for accessing `Vai` via its command line interface (CLI).
- Text Editor with Markdown syntax support. [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/) is recommended.

:::info Note for VSCode
Sometimes when u press tab, it indents by 2 spaces and not 4. Adjust accordingly, this is very important and can affect markdown parsing.
:::
### Install

Run the command below. It is strongly recommended to run this in a **venv**. It is still ok to run it globally.

```
pip install vai-ssg
```

# Usage

---
There are only 3 commands to know. and they are:

- `vai init`
- `vai run`
- `vai build` (only used for deploying your website. Look at the [Deploy](/introduction/deploy) section)

:::tip IMPORTANT
Make sure you run these commands at the root of your directory. Else `vai` would throw an error
:::

### vai init



**It is strongly recommended to run the project in a [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html)**

```
vai init
```

This is the **first command** you should run in your project.
Before running `vai init`, make sure you are in a directory where u will generate your static sites as `vai init` will populate the current directory. Upon running the command, you will a **file strucutre** generated. Look below for more info.



### vai run
```
vai run
```
You can now run  `vai run` in your terminal and it will start the **development server** at `localhost:6600`. By default you will see a `Welcome to vai` page generated by `vai init`. You will start to see live changes as you create, delete and modify your markdown files. Before you can start typing however, it is important to understand the  `number-Name` folder and file structure `vai` uses. Continue reading this tutorial to understand how to use `vai`.


## File Structure

After running `vai init`, you will notice the following structure being generated in your current directory:

```
.
├── config.yaml
├── src_html
├── src_md
│   ├── 1-Welcome
│   │   └── 1-welcome.md
│   └── README.md
├── static
│   ├── favicon.png
│   ├── logo.png
│   ├── script.js
│   └── style.css
└── templates
    └── layout_no_header.html
```

There is a lot files and directories here, but the most of the times, you would just be interacting with the `src_md/` directory where u will write all the markdown files and it's logic.
In this Getting started section, we wil only go through the `config.yaml`, `favicon.png`, `logo.png` and `src_md/`. If you are content with the default settings, you can ignore the rest of the files, else you can look them up in the [Further Customisation](/further-customisation/) section.

## Source code
---
You have to write content in `src_md` directory. Vai uses **directory and file names** to build the site structure and sidebar

- Uses a `number-Name` pattern for ordering in the sidebar.
- directories = sidebar section.
- Markdown files = pages.
- The numbering is important to show how it is ranked in the left sidebar

**Example:**

```
src_md/
├── 1-Introduction/
│   ├── 1-What is Vai.md
│   └── 2-Getting Started.md
└── 2-Advanced/
    └── 1-Advanced Features.md
```

**Resulting URLs**:

* `/introduction/what-is-vai/`
* `/introduction/getting-started/`
* `/advanced-features/search/`


## Images
---
You **must** add your images inside of the `static` directory. When linking, you should link it via `/static/<file-name>`. For better organisation, it is **encouraged** to create a seperate directory (e.g. `images`)  inside of the `static` directory to store your images and link them appropriately(e.g.  `/static/images/<file-name>`).

If you would like to add your own custom logo (located at the top left, above the sidebar) and favicon, replace the default `favicon.png` and `logo.png` with your own custom one. Do note that the extension does not matter as long as it is a viable image. It just so happens that the default images for `vai` are in `.png` format.

You can ignore the `script.js` and `style.css` files if you are content with the styling and logic of the site. Look at [Advanced Section](advance/advanced-features/) for further customisation. 

For linking images, you must add the image inside of the `static` directory.


## Config File (config.yaml)
---



The `config.yaml` file is responsible for seeting your site's header, navigation, and other global links (more info below).


```yaml
github_link: "https://github.com/Nareshix/vai"
edit_this_page_on_github_link: 'https://github.com/Nareshix/vai/tree/main/src_md'
github_repo_name: "vai" # required for github pages. Case-sensitive.

internals:
  - title: "Home"
    link: "/"
  - title: "About"
    link: "/about-us/"

externals:
  - title: "My Company"
    link: "https://example.com/"

dropdowns:
  - main_title: "Resources"
    items:
      - title: "Blog"
        type: external # Opens in new tab
        link: "https://example.com/blog"
      - title: "Getting Started"
        type: internal # Opens in same tab
        link: "/introduction/getting-started/"
```

*Lets talk more about the key value pairs below*

### Header Navigation Links

These settings control the links that appear in the top navigation bar of your site.

#### 1. `internals`

Use this for links to pages within your own site. They will open in the same browser tab.

```yaml
internals:
  - title: "Home"
    link: "/"
```

#### 2. `externals`

Use this for links to other websites. They will open in a new browser tab and display an "external link" icon.

```yaml
externals:
  - title: "My Company"
    link: "https://example.com/"
```

#### 3. `dropdowns`

Use this to group multiple links under a single menu item. Each item in the dropdown can be specified as internal or external.

```yaml
dropdowns:
  - main_title: "Resources"
    items:
      - title: "Blog"
        type: external # Opens in new tab
        link: "https://example.com/blog"
      - title: "Getting Started"
        type: internal # Opens in same tab
        link: "/introduction/getting-started/"
```

---

### GitHub Integration

These settings connect your documentation site to its source repository on GitHub.

#### 1. `github_link`

Controls the GitHub logo icon in the top-right corner of the header. Set this to your repository’s main URL. Leave it blank to hide the icon.

    ```yaml
    github_link: "YOUR_GITHUB_LINK"
    ```
    
#### 2. `edit_this_page_on_github_link`

Controls the “Edit this page on GitHub” link at the bottom of each page. This lets readers suggest improvements.

    ```yaml
    edit_this_page_on_github_link: "YOUR_GITHUB_CONRIBUTION_PAGE"
    ```

:::info INFO
we also have provided `README.md` file at the root of `src_md/`. You may write your project's contribution guide there. To link to it, simply navigate to your `src_md` directory on **GitHub**, copy the URL from your browser, and paste it as the value for `edit_this_page_on_github_link`.
 
:::

#### 3. `github_repo_name`

- This is essential **only** if you are deploying to **GitHub Pages**.
- Keep in mind that the repo name is **Case sensitive**
  
```yaml
github_repo_name: "vai"
```

## What's Next?
Before you starting using `vai`, it is **important** to check out the final section of the `Inroduction` which is `Markdown Syntax`. It does not teach you about Makrdown Syntax but rather explore  common things that are slightly different in `vai`.